Our History

Mzumbe University was established by the Mzumbe University Charter, 2007 under Section 25 of the Universities Act. No. 7 of 2005 which repealed Mzumbe University Act. No 9 of 2001. As a Training Institute, the University boasts of over 50 years experience of training in the administration of justice, business management, public administration, accountancy, finance, political science and good governance.

Mzumbe University origin can be traced back to 1953 when the British Colonial Administration established a Local Government School in the country. The school was aimed at training local Chiefs, Native Authority Staff and Councilors. The level of training was elevated after Tanzania (Tanganyika) independence to include training of Central Government Officials, Rural Development Officers and local Court Magistrates. In 1972, the then Local Government School was merged with the Institute of Public Administration of the University of Dar es Salaam to form the Institute of Development Management (IDM-Mzumbe). IDM was a higher learning institution for training professional managers in the public and private sectors.

Given the natural growth of the Institute over the years of successful operation and the changing national and international human resource needs, the Government transformed it into fully fledge public University. This was made under the Act of Parliament No.21 of 2001. In December 2006, the Mzumbe University Act No 21 of 2001 was repealed by the Universities Act of Tanzania No. 7 of 2005 and replaced by the Mzumbe University charter, 2007 which now guide the operations and management of the University. The mandate of the University as stipulated in the Mzumbe University Charter, 2007 focuses on training, research, publications and public service cum consultancy.





Our Functions

1. To encourage academic staff and students to learn and seek knowledge and truth;
2. To produce highly educated and adequately trained experts well prepared and equipped with requisite skills for self-employment and manning of key positions in both public and private sectors;
3. To promote, facilitate and sponsor research into technological, social, economic, political and cultural spheres for the welfare and development of mankind within and outside the United Republic of Tanzania;
4. To seek or institute and award fellowship, scholarships, bursaries, medals, prizes and other forms of awards, assistance or sponsorship for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge and pursuit of truth;
5. To arrange for the publication and dissemination of material produced in connection with the work and activities of the University;
6. To conduct and administer examination and confer degrees, diplomas, certificates, and other awards of the University;
7. To develop, promote and undertake the provision of adult, continuing and distance education for the enhancement of good governance and efficacious solution to socio-economic and political problems;
8. To develop and maintain a reference library and provide library services in the fields of study undertaken by the University;
9. To cooperate with the government of the United Republic of Tanzania in the planned and orderly development of quality education, science and technology in the United Republic of Tanzania;
10. To establish links and to cooperate with other national and international institutions in the initiation and conduct of cooperative research, publication and training programmes for the mutual benefit of the cooperating institutions and the United Republic of Tanzania and generally for the pursuit of the mission of the University;
11. To do any other thing in accordance with the provisions of the Mzumbe University Charter or any other written law in force in the United Republic of Tanzania in pursuance of the mission of the University.




Mission, Vision & Core Values

Mission
The Mission of the University is to provide opportunities for acquisition, development, preservation and dissemination of knowledge and skills through training, research, technical and/or professional services.

Vision
Mzumbe University is recognized as a leading institution in Africa for demand driven knowledge generation, application, preservation and dissemination for socio-economic development by 2025.

Core Values
The building of a cohesive and binding organizational culture is a fundamental pre-requisite for the sustainable development of the University. The following are the core values which guides Mzumbe University’s organizational culture.

Transparency: Being transparent in all our work and dealings and stands ready for public scrutiny.
Accountability: Being accountable to our stakeholders and to the community for the mandate and responsibilities bestowed upon us.
Creativity and Innovativeness: Always curious and striving to reach out and embrace new technologies and innovative methods of doing our work and contributing to socio-economic development.
Integrity: Being exemplary in our behavior and acting with honesty and impartiality in all our transactions.
Team work: Working at all times as a team.
Diligence: Being meticulous and through in whatever we do.
Respect for others: We always respect personal opinion academic freedom.
Responsive to society needs: We strive to continuously respond to current and future needs of the society.






Baraza la Chuo

A:  MWENYEKITI
      Prof. Saida Yahya-Othman

B:  WAJUMBE

1. Mkurugenzi wa Elimu ya Juu.
    Wizara ya Elimu, Sayansi na Teknolojia,Mji wa Kiserikali, Mitumba,
    S.L.P. 10,
    DODOMA. 
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(e) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

2. Dkt. Laurean Ndumbaro.
    Katibu Mkuu - Ofisi ya Rais, Menejimenti ya Utumishi wa Umma na Utawala Bora,Mji wa Kiserikali, Mitumba,
    S.L.P. 40404,
    DODOMA. 
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(e) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

3. Bi. Gloriosa Maganga..
    Mwakilishi wa Baraza la Wahitimu,
    S.L.P. 1719,
    TABORA. 
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(m) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

4. Dkt. Wilhelm L. Mafuru.
    Mkurugenzi wa Mafunzo,
    Wizara ya Kilimo, Uvuvi na Mifugo,
    S.L.P. 2128,
    40487 DODOMA.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(m) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

5. Prof. Lughano J. M. Kusiluka.
    Makamu Mkuu wa Chuo,
    Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe,
    S.L.P. 1, 
    MZUMBE.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(b) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]
   
6. Prof. Bernadeta Killian.
    Naibu Makamu Mkuu wa Chuo, 
    Chuo Kikuu cha Dar es Salaam,
    S.L.P. 35040,
    DAR ES SALAAM. 
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(c) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

7. Dkt. Charles Mwamwaja.
    Kamishna Msaidizi wa Bajeti, 
    18 Barababara ya Jakaya Kikwete,
    SLP 2802
    40468 DODOMA.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(f) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

8. CPA Pius A. Maneno.
    Mwakilishi wa Taasisi za Weledi,
    Mkurugenzi Mtendaji – NBAA,
    S.L.P. 5128,
    DAR ES SALAAM.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(g) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

 9. Bi. Judith Newa.
    Mwakilishi wa Chama cha Wafanyakazi - THTU,
    S.L.P. 1,
    MZUMBE.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(j) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

10. Dkt. Harold Utouh.
    Mwakilishi wa Chama cha Wanataaluma,
    S.L.P. 1,
    MZUMBE.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(h) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

11. CPA Jane Moshi,
    Mwakilishi wa Wafanyakazi Waendeshaji,
    S.L.P. 1,
    MZUMBE.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(i) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

12. Bi. Akila B Mollel
    Mwakilishi wa Wanachuo - MUSO,
    S.L.P. 1,
    MZUMBE.
    [Kwa mujibu wa Sehemu ya III, Kifungu Na. 19(1)(n) cha Hati Idhini ya Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe, 2007]

C: KATIBU
    Bw. Innocent Lazaro Mgeta.
    Kaimu Katibu,
    Baraza la Chuo Kikuu Mzumbe,
    S.L.P. 1,
    MZUMBE.





Senior Officers

CHANCELLOR
Hon. Dr. Ali Mohamed Shein

COUNCIL CHAIRMAN
Prof. Saida Yahya-Othman

VICE CHANCELLOR
Prof. Lughano J. M. Kusiluka

DEPUTY VICE CHANCELLOR (ACADEMIC)
Prof. William John Senkondo Mwegoha

DEPUTY VICE CHANCELLOR (ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE)
Prof. Allen Rangia Mushi

Ag. COUNCIL SECRETARY
Mr. Innocent Lazaro Mgeta







Policies
1. Accomodation Policy (2013)

2. Estate Management Policy (2018)

3. Gender Development Policy (2008)

4. Procurement Mannual (2015) 

5. Quality Assurance Policy (2017)

6. Research Policy & Operational Guidelines (2014)

7. Short Course and Consultancy Policy (2011)

8. Students' Welfare Policy (2018)

9. Mzumbe University Anti-Corruption Strategy

10. Mzumbe University Clients’ Service Charter

11. Mzumbe University Policy On Environmental Management

12. A Policy on Gender Development

13. Mzumbe University Investment Policy

14. Research and Innovation Policy, and Operational Guidelines